WP3 Minutes 06-04-11[¶](#WP3-Minutes-06-04-11)
==============================================

Changing to Powwow now:\
PIN: 669049\
Access nos: <http://pdf.powwownow.com/pdf/GBR_en_enhanced.pdf>

Attendees[¶](#Attendees)
------------------------

\<please fill in....\>\
Nick Allott (Impleo)\
Marco Gavelli (ISMB)\
Stefano D’Angelo (ISMB)\
Ziran Sun (Samsung)\
Andrea Atzeni (POLITO)\
Stephan Steglich (FOKUS)\
Andre Paul (FOKUS)\
Dirk Thatmann (FOKUS)\
Davide Patti (UniCT)\
Simon (BMW)\
Peter (DTAG)\
Radoslaw Maruszewski (Volantis)\
Daniel (Telfonica)\
Heiko (IBBT)\
Dieter (IBBT)\
Katerina\
Jrisha TUM\
Dave, W3C\
Andrew Oxford\
Claes (SEMCA)\
Anders\
Habib (samsung)\
Sven Lachmund (DOCOMO)\
Christian Schaefer (DOCOMO)\
Thomas Walter (DOCOMO)\
Stefano Vercelli (Telecom Italia)\
George Gionis (NTUA)\
Katerina Touriki (NTUA)\
Ronny Graefe (DTAG)\
Jos/Michael (NTUA)\
George Voulgaris (VisionMobile)\
Krishna (TUM)\
Matthias Faeth (TNO)\
Katrin Jordan (DT)

Agenda[¶](#Agenda)
------------------

### Intro / Management[¶](#Intro-Management)

    - anyone having problems keeping redmine tasks up to date?no

    - any requirements on logistical/tools frontno

    - need to start structuring deliverable....      - sections - specfication type  - examples·         Browser plug-in / extension handling (Simon)

Simon: NPAPI done\
Nick todo: local web server approach...\
Nick suggestion to:\
 - coordinate with discovery, policy mechanis...

### User ID and Data Management (Sven/Andrea)[¶](#User-ID-and-Data-Management-SvenAndrea)

second draft architecture on redmine:
</wp3-1/wiki/Use_Cases>\
Link:
<http://dev.webinos.org/redmine/attachments/466/webinos_AA_proposal_v2.ppt>\
example of activity diagram:
</wp3-1/wiki/Scenario1Sequence>

Sven: next week to talk to other subject areas when the interaction
diagrams are complete.

Next call on friday....

Request:\
Overlay/discovery... Ziran todo... Dave todo\
Crypto means for addressing slide no 23...

### Context (Hans/GeorgeG)[¶](#Context-HansGeorgeG)

</wp3-1/wiki/Context_Management>\
Heiko: contact other groups to interface with context management
framework\
Examine Serenoa....

### Policy Management (Davide/Salvatore)[¶](#Policy-Management-DavideSalvatore)

</wp3-1/wiki/Policy_Architecture>

Todo: talk to the extension handling\
ID management : post fri - policy managent co-ordination...\
Todo: context heikko.

### Device, Service, and Application Discovery (Ziran)[¶](#Device-Service-and-Application-Discovery-Ziran)

</wp3-1/wiki/30_March_-_05_April>

### Web Application handling (Andre)[¶](#Web-Application-handling-Andre)

To follow up with andre

### Privileged Applications (Krishna)[¶](#Privileged-Applications-Krishna)

</wp3-1/wiki/%27Privilege_Apps_and_Services_related_to_Browser_and_Policies%27>

Background work done.

Trust boundary, integrity checks, and sensitve apis to be

Todo: Use cases to be created\
Todo: Polito to produce sequence diagrams.

### Event Handling (Stefano/Marco)[¶](#Event-Handling-StefanoMarco)

Fundamantal question: is RPC part of event handling.\
Todo: start some real coding to explore solution methods.\
· Overlay Networking model (Dave)

Hands on work on discovery which is leading to an investigation of what
role the overlay model can provide for simplifying discovery given
variations in vocabulary and assumptions across different discovery
mechanisms. Looking at NAT traversal and role of personal zone in
establishing logical peer to peer connections independent of
NAT/Firewall boundaries. This will lead to hands on work on identity
based upon social networks.

### Analytics[¶](#Analytics)

- nick: todo - host call

- Proposal to rename to metering - georgev: (metrics? not overly
religious bout it, but came across “metrics” as a term of the “raw
measurable data” collected for the purpose of analytics. and sounds
nice...)\
- All subject areas to create - hot list of meterable events - georgev:
(events, data snapshots / states, capability to define signatures a la
IDS, i.e. detect sequence of events/statuses)\
- policy to grant permission for entities to monitor\
- default privacy settings to mask as much of everything else\
- legal T&Cs to back it up georgev: can check if we (VM) have bwidth to
do this\
- georgev: define how far into the server-side webinos analytics go.
(e.g. define transport/intermediate storage, end repository? that would
create ownership issues)

- georgev: proposal to do an review of commercial solutions? but probly
not within scope of wp3...\
review use cases/stories for analytics related issues? “context” work
may provide a good “case study” for one application of analytics)

### 3.2 APIs Update (Claes)[¶](#32-APIs-Update-Claes)

Call tomorrow...\
Lots in input received.\
Requirements and use cases needed for non exising apis.\
Specification work to start

### Tools (Nick/Daniel)[¶](#Tools-NickDaniel)

- Git progress?\
- Install Daniels:

- Javascript stub examples......\
 Decision on tools: 3.1 wiki\
recommend: Claes review daniels tool chain and either endorse or make
alternative proposal\
recommend Stafano and Ziran review WebIDL for applicability to discovery
and eventing mechansism\
 - unlikely to user webidl directly. but possibly can user derivatives\
 - requirement - discovery: must be able to return at runtime list of
methods and parameters\
 - requrement - eventing - must at runtime be able to create stubs and
servers that correspond to teh webidl descriptions.

### Wrap up[¶](#Wrap-up)

- meeting timing\
berlin f2f: may 3rd may 5th.. :2.5 day meeting, starting on Tuesday, May
3rd, at 10 am and finishing on Thursday, May 5th, around 2 pm.

